**All That Glitters Is Not Gold: The Dark Side of the Olympics**

By: Ng Yu Xin

*Many seem to place Olympic athletes on a pedestal, but is there more to
those glittering medals than meets the eye?*

‘Citius, altius, fortius’ – the Latin equivalent of ‘faster, higher,
stronger’ – is a phrase that we have likely come across at one point or
another. As the motto of the Olympics Games, it encourages participants
to scale heights, push boundaries, and reset standards. Modern day
Olympics has evolved from the ancient Olympics in many ways.

Originating from ancient Greece more than 3000 years ago, the Olympic
Games have a long history tracing back to 776 BC. The Games were staged
every 4 years, till they were abolished in the early Christian era, only
to be revived in 1896 in Athens. 280 participants from 13 nations took
part in 43 events such as swimming, gymnastics and cycling. However,
only men were allowed to attend the Games, as its founder Pierre de
Coubertin deemed women’s involvement in the Games as ‘impractical,
uninteresting, unaesthetic, and incorrect’.

Modern times, however, have seemed to provide women with the tools to
shatter the glass ceiling in the sports arena. For instance, the
historic decision mandating that “any new sport seeking to be included
on the Olympic programme had to include women’s events” by the
International Olympic Committee in 1991 signalled a step towards
achieving equality. A year later in 1992, badminton, judo, and biathlon
were open to female athletes, and by the 2000s, an increasing number of
sports including wrestling and ice hockey became open to women’s
participation as well. More recently, the 2016 Rio Olympic Games
provided a breakthrough for women, with record-high figures indicating
that almost 50% of the total athletes at the Games were females. This
was in comparison to a century ago where the goal of gender equality is
still quite far-reaching, as displayed by the higher number of events
exclusive to men, such as wrestling. Clearly, there has been leaps made
in terms of achieving gender equality, especially in women’s
participation in the Games since the ancient times.

However, an issue which shone the spotlight on the effects of patriarchy
in the sports arena surfaced recently, shocking people from all around
the world. The recent sexual abuse case involving USA Gymnastics (USAG)
and former national team doctor Larry Nassar revealed the systemic
issues that the aforementioned organisation has turned a blind eye to.
USAG, a dominant organisation in the gymnastics field which has produced
gymnasts who have consistently won accolades, held a dark secret for
years. It failed to act accordingly despite its female gymnasts’
complaints about Nassar’s sexual advances towards them. Then Michigan
State sports physician, Nassar had bribed his victims to keep mum about
his misdeeds, and when victims confided in a USAG coach, they were
discouraged from filing formal complaints. The fact that the USAG team
failed to prioritise their gymnasts’ welfare was appalling, and
illustrates the outrageous acts that the organisation tolerates in its
pursuit of gold medals. Many were unaware of such acts, as the pain and
humiliation felt by the gymnasts were masked by their forced smiles as
they received their medals and attempted to bask in glory, while hiding
a sinister secret.

There are definitely cultural benefits with the progress of the
Olympics. It is undeniably true that the number of hosting countries and
participants expanded exponentially from the ancient times, now
involving more than 27,000 athletes from more than 200 countries. The
progress of the Olympics serves most importantly to link culture to
sports, with athletes from different countries getting exposed to the
enriched history of each host country, and through interaction with
athletes from different countries.

#### The ‘Dark Side’ of the Games:

**Scoring the goal with a gold – but at what cost?**

Though the Olympics appears to be all glitz and glamour, there have been
several pressing issues that, though hidden from the spotlight, are
problems that need to be solved.

First and foremost, there exists a strong association between olympic
sports and social exclusion. Training for the Olympics is no doubt a
costly endeavour, and requires a great amount of support ranging from
emotional, physical, and financial reinforcement. Money is needed to
hire the best coaches, the most renowned nutritionists, top-notch
technology that can aid in training, and the best suits and attire that
could shave off milliseconds in one’s race. Yet, these are luxuries that
some cannot afford to have. In rural countries, where there is a lack of
support from family members or the state, there are many talented
individuals that have gone unfounded or ignored. The fact that budding
athletes are denied the chance to hone their skills in the sport of
their choice because of the lack of financial support underscores the
idea that the Olympics is an exclusive enterprise, which is ironically
contrary to the mission of the International Olympic Committee’s mission
to encourage people to practice sport regardless of their backgrounds or
economic status.

As an athlete myself, I am familiar with the need to make frequent
purchases for suits and equipment for training, especially since all of
these are marketed by advertisements claiming to have made use of the
latest technology. Thankfully, with my parents’ support, I have the
financial ability to purchase the brand, colour and size of swimsuits
which I desire. This goes to show that most of the time, behind every
successful athlete lies a stellar team – the most renowned athletes have
coaches, nutritionists, personal chauffeurs, and supportive parents to
guide them. While the training and hard work that athletes put in are
important, the extra resources that they are given lends them a slight
advantage, which ultimately makes the most difference in a highly
competitive sporting arena, as exemplified by the Olympics. Yet, many
around the world are not privileged enough to receive such privileges –
their future in the Olympics seems to have been predetermined.

Yet, due to the overwhelming pressure of having to perform, some
athletes have flouted the Games’ rules by committing crimes such as
doping. For instance, Russian athletes were recently banned from the
Winter Olympics over state-sponsored drugs, which aimed to speed up
their recovery process. Tainted urine samples were switched with the
intent of passing the doping test. Other groups have also appeared to
have defied the spirit of the Games, pushing themselves to the point
where their emotional needs are compromised. In fact, governments play a
part in perpetuating this. For instance, there exists a ‘win at all
costs’ mentality in China, which has received backlash from the public.
Children as young as the age of four are put through tough training
camps, leaving the comforts of their homes to train. Some parents have
even taken on the role as a coach, training their children to push their
boundaries at a tender age. Others have sacrificed their children's’
childhoods in hopes of creating an Olympic athlete, thinking that
sending them to training camps would pave a bright future for their
child. At times, children are not even allowed to see their families due
to the fear that they might become ‘distracted’. A case in point would
be the lengths that Chinese diver Wu Minxia’s family went to to ensure
their daughter’s success, where they concealed the death of both her
grandparents and her mother’s eight-year battle with breast cancer when
she was training for the 2012 London Olympics, such that she would
remain focused and win medals for her country.

Though many other parents of up-and-coming athletes are reluctant to
send off their children, they often agree to part with them because of
the belief that they will be able to help their families break out of
the poverty cycle, and achieve a brighter future. But how many have
truly gone on to reach an apex, or successfully pursued sports as a
career? How many have stayed at the top after winning a few awards? The
glory that being an Olympian brings does not always stay – Zhang
Shangwu, a gold medallist at the Olympics, was found begging on the
streets in Beijing after his sporting career ended due to an injury.
Because Zhang did not have an education, he was unable to find a stable
job, and thus resorted to begging on the streets. He is one of the many
athletes who have been expelled from the state sports system after
failing to continue competing to bring glory to the state.

However, these countries are not the only ones which have tainted the
spirit of the Olympics. There exist many other states which have
prioritised their athletes’ achievements over honouring the true meaning
of the Games, even if the media has not shone a spotlight on them.
Though altering and eliminating mindsets which prioritise tangible
success over everything else would be an ideal situation, this is
especially challenging when the state itself condones such beliefs and
practices. It is often difficult to discredit the valid desire for
nations to gain glory and fame through the success of their athletes who
bag medals at the prestigious Olympic Games, as such attention can also
be used to bring progress to the growth of the country as a whole. In
fact, these issues are not completely new either. Similar violations
were also observed in the ancient Olympic Games. During the 98th
Olympics in 388 B.C., a boxer bribed his opponents to let him win, and
both athletes were subsequently fined. In another case, a wrestler tried
to gouge the eyes of his opponent and bite him. However, athletes were
more brutally punished then, and were beaten by rods for fouling their
opponents or cheating to gain an edge.

**So… What’s next after the Olympics?**

A lot of the time, the Olympic Games are put on the pedestal by
athletes, and viewed as the pinnacle of all sports – winning a coveted
medal at the Games is almost every athlete’s dream. However, even after
being awarded a coveted medal at the Games, many athletes end up
struggling with a sense of loss. Though their hard work may have paid
off after years of blood, sweat, tears and sacrifice, they are often
uncertain of their future and are unsure of what the next goal should
be.

In fact, many athletes are unable to come to terms with the idea that
the Olympics is not the be-all and end-all. Granted, the Olympic Games
is an international platform where top-notch athletes gather to display
the skills that they have worked hard to accumulate over the years.
However, there are several other competitions which allow athletes to do
the same, or even more. For instance, when participating in local
competitions, athletes gain the opportunity to display their support for
the sport, and inspire their fellow countrymen. Seeking for the next
goal is the only way to continue striving, which is an attitude that was
embodied by Singapore’s first Olympic gold medallist Joseph Schooling
after his win at the Olympics. “\[It was nice\] after my race… It was
crazy and everything was just nuts. But right now, I’m kind of looking
forward to the next step,” he shared. His ability to aim higher, push
his boundaries, and better himself beyond the Olympics, is truly
commendable. This, perhaps, reveals that there is more to life than the
pursuit of that one gold Olympic medal.

In a sense, the “win or die” attitude can be said to have persisted from
the ancient Olympics to today’s modern Games. While many place Olympians
on a pedestal, there are, in actuality, many darker issues hidden behind
the shiny medals. Behind every medal and every smile lies a story, often
untold, which tends to be cast aside to make way for the glory and fame
that overwhelms athletes, parents, coaches and the public. All that
glitters is not gold; the truth behind the shiny sheen may be dark,
disappointing and deceiving, but only by acknowledging it and committing
to making a change, can we step out of this dark tunnel into the light.

*References*

[*https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/ancient-history-cheating-olympics-180960003/*](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/ancient-history-cheating-olympics-180960003/)

[*https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/nov/09/russian-athletes-admit-taking-banned-substances-grigory-rodchenkov-2014-winter-olympics*](https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/nov/09/russian-athletes-admit-taking-banned-substances-grigory-rodchenkov-2014-winter-olympics)

[*http://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/joseph-schooling-back-to-school-olympic-champ-visits-alma-mater-anglo-chinese-school*](http://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/joseph-schooling-back-to-school-olympic-champ-visits-alma-mater-anglo-chinese-school)

[*http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/china/8645237/Top-Chinese-gymnast-found-begging-on-the-street.html*](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/china/8645237/Top-Chinese-gymnast-found-begging-on-the-street.html)

[*https://www.theepochtimes.com/abandoned-by-the-state-former-chinese-athletes-struggle-after-sports\_2131289.html*](https://www.theepochtimes.com/abandoned-by-the-state-former-chinese-athletes-struggle-after-sports_2131289.html)

[*http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/sdut-in-china-happy-gymnastics-replaces-grind-of-2016jul12-story.html*](http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/sdut-in-china-happy-gymnastics-replaces-grind-of-2016jul12-story.html)

[*http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/05/sports/05iht-gymnast.1.15012163.html*](http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/05/sports/05iht-gymnast.1.15012163.html)

[*http://metro.co.uk/2016/08/12/how-many-countries-in-the-olympics-some-nations-wont-get-a-chance-at-glory-6063233/*](http://metro.co.uk/2016/08/12/how-many-countries-in-the-olympics-some-nations-wont-get-a-chance-at-glory-6063233/)

[*https://www.irishtimes.com/news/an-olympiad-with-females-would-be-impractical-uninteresting-unaesthetic-and-improper-baron-pierre-de-coubertin-1.1222948*](https://www.irishtimes.com/news/an-olympiad-with-females-would-be-impractical-uninteresting-unaesthetic-and-improper-baron-pierre-de-coubertin-1.1222948)

[*https://www.scholastic.com/teachers/articles/teaching-content/history-olympic-games/*](https://www.scholastic.com/teachers/articles/teaching-content/history-olympic-games/)

[*https://www.livescience.com/2733-olympics-changed-world.html*](https://www.livescience.com/2733-olympics-changed-world.html)

[*https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/08/02/wu-minxia-chinese-olympic-diver-learns-cancer-died\_n\_1733115.html*](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/08/02/wu-minxia-chinese-olympic-diver-learns-cancer-died_n_1733115.html)

[*https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/ancient-history-cheating-olympics-180960003/*](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/ancient-history-cheating-olympics-180960003/)

[*https://www.olympic.org/women-in-sport/background/key-dates*](https://www.olympic.org/women-in-sport/background/key-dates)

[*http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/first-modern-olympic-games*](http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/first-modern-olympic-games)

[*https://www.sbs.com.au/topics/zela/article/2016/05/03/women-olympic-games-uninteresting-unaesthetic-incorrect*](https://www.sbs.com.au/topics/zela/article/2016/05/03/women-olympic-games-uninteresting-unaesthetic-incorrect)
